Entry: 2023-11-06

Given the error margin of 24 hours, it's been precicely 3 months since I
last wrote here. You can't really tell, however, because among other
things I nuked the news/ directory and feed.ass file. The only news
source here now is .plan (and plan.txt). To see if I made any changes
you can do something like this:

$ $some_cool_network_client "$@" | grep '^Entry: '

The art/ directory has been changed as well: I've updated and removed
some old articles, and changed the file names like so:

000.the_first_file.txt
001.the_second_file.txt

The ordering is somewhat arbitrary now, because I don't remember what
order I actually wrote them in. Also, this scheme totally fails if I
end up writing more than 1000 of those, but in such case I will have
to start using several directories anyway.

The site now also serves files over gemini. There's no git/ directory
yet because to my knowledge, there isn't a gemini-git-interface
program yet, and I didn't manage to write one in half an hour. :)

And one more bit of news: I'll be retiring the git protocol "soon",
so in future there'll only be anonymous ssh access to my repos.
Probably not this year, though.


Entry: 2023-11-08

Yesterday (2023-11-07) I've had some fun with VMM and VNC. Finished
the article today: art/010.x11_isolation.txt.


Entry: 2023-11-09

I drew a thing! Such excitement for that might sound strange coming
from a 23-years-old man -- I know that it might because when I
studied at university there were a few people surprised to learn that
I don't draw things. I now sometimes sketch things in my notebook,
usually when I am bored, but can't/don't want to read a book, and a
few of them look decent. That's probably my first decent digital
drawing.

It's an ouroboros made with bitmap(1), it's on ftp at
/pub/bitmaps/ouroboros{,.png}. The png version now decorates my
stagit pages (rather than the old 'aa' logo).


Entry: 2023-11-10

Finished probably the last article for a while:
art/011.building_this_site.txt; also added my geek code (but not to
.plan, only to index.{gph,gmi,html}).


Entry: 2023-11-16

This weekend (2023-11-18 and 19), I'll be doing more stupid
incompatible changes to the site. Most services will be unavailable
for some time, and after you may have to update some URLs.


Entry: 2023-11-18

Finished most of the changes that I wanted to do: that moved most
files and directories into usr/aa/, and changed the canonical URL to
manpager.org (that's the fifth :|; I am planning to keep
manpager.net, and alearx.org permanently aliased to it, however).
Unfortunately, that's about as much as I am willing to do at the
moment, so there's once again to gopher/www/gemini interface to git.
That's all right: I'll make proper description files for my projects
before Monday, and probably figure something out with git next
weekend.


Entry: 2023-12-31

Two changes:

1. There is now a "thoughs" directory at my directory on the
   {web,gopher,gemini} site. See
   https://manpager.org/usr/aa/thoughs/000000.intro.txt.
2. I completely rewrote gpm in perl. There are lots of improvements.
   See the CHANGES file.
